this guy dave dow started up a youtube
channel
advocating for people to quit video
games take life more seriously
lead a more meaningful rich and
rewarding life
so right away you'd think that he and i
have a lot in common
but if you've watched my channel for a
few years part of what makes this so
interesting talk about
is that no i feel profoundly alienated
from the message that he's delivering
it's common knowledge that most people
don't even enjoy their careers
so if working in the real world is as
miserable as it seems
why would you ever be excited to leave
your video game life behind
you get to meet new people one of the
things that i enjoy most about my life
is that i get to meet new people
the world is full of fascinating people
who are actually living
amazing lives and when you meet someone
that you find
interesting it then can make your life
more interesting as well
i think that my personal commitment to
honesty and integrity has serious
implications for this kind of
advice it might be encouraging for me to
lie to you
but i neither think that's going to be
effective in terms of the outcomes like
if you go around giving people
encouragement
that's fundamentally dishonest what are
the outcomes going to be what are the
outcomes going to be for them
in practice and what's going to happen
as a next step
when they come back and regard you as
someone who's been been lying
let's start with a really tangible
example
back when i was living in vien chen the
capital city of laos
i applied to work as a school teacher at
a particular
esl school and i remember i met with and
chatted with
a blonde canadian attractive
female employee of the school and sadly
that's probably relevant to why she was
employed by the school
and she said nothing but the most
encouraging things about the school
itself
and about the guy who was in charge of
the school the guy who ran the school
he was a memorable character he was
maybe a
400 pound effusive
effeminate homosexual who sort of
fluttered around the
room and said everything in very
over-the-top
terms of everything was fabulous
everything was wonderful like every
it was hard to get a read on the guy
when what you're trying to do is figure
out like
okay so i'm hired like what exact
situation here that same blonde female
i talked to her many months later maybe
was six months later where i said to her
look you know here's my situation this
guy
said i was fabulous and wonderful when
he hired me he did all this paperwork he
got me a legal visa to be here as a
teacher he got the work visa paper and
then he never offered me a day's work he
never got in touch like it it's very
paradoxical to me like he
he put in even some money as well as
effort to hire me and then he never
followed through and she kind of looked
down at the floor and was a little bit
ashamed of herself and she said
oh yeah that happens all the time and
immediately with me sharing this
experience she then started dishing out
all these other examples of employees
whose lives were ruined and left
brokenhearted it was like
wait wait a minute when i met you six
months ago
at the start of this job why did you
tell me all this encouraging stuff
that now turns out really not to be true
right why would you come on youtube and
tell people
that if they adopt a vegan diet they can
lose
10 pounds effortlessly losing 10 pounds
isn't easy
and on the other hand if you're the kind
of person who thinks it is easy
it's going to seem easy to you whether
you're on a vegan diet or a high protein
diet you know for some people some
people have the knack
some people have the right attitude or
they're highly athletic or they have you
know for whatever reason for some people
it's easy to lose weight
but if so it's not really going to be
easier for you if you can diet than
there's a meat diet if you struggle on a
meat diet you're going to struggle on a
vegan diet
right like you may think you're helping
someone
when you meet them they're new on the
job you say hey welcome to the team this
is a great school
we have a great boss and everything's
great
but you're not helping them you're
deceiving them
you're lying to them right you may think
you're helping the other person and you
may think you're helping yourself as a
league leader in the vegan movement
and you may think you're helping the
vegan movement as a whole if you lie to
someone and say hey if you become vegan
these are the outcomes you're going to
get and you're not
you're discrediting yourself you're
discrediting the vegan movement
and you're causing a particular type of
harm to the person you're encouraging
because just as in the first few steps
they take they may feel encouragement
when they figure out how false and
misleading this advice was
inevitably the sequel to that will be
discouragement
disillusionment that may be quite
profound
the world is full of fascinating people
who are actually living
amazing lives and when you meet someone
that you find
interesting it then can make your life
more interesting as well
and when you start to develop these new
relationships
amazing things can happen and your life
can go in new directions
that you may never have thought even
possible most importantly you can build
new friendships and if you haven't
already possibly meet the love of your
life
false and misleading but encouraging
claims he's making here
they partly resemble encouraging claims
made by
religious cults like buddhist groups
they partly resemble false and
misleading claims made by
political groups within veganism in the
last few years that i've encountered you
can promise people friendship
you can promise people they're going to
meet the love of their lives you can
promise people all kinds of things if
they sign up and join your political
movement
are you going to deliver in the end
don't you just end up discrediting
yourself discrediting the movement
causing disillusionment for the person
you've managed to sucker in with these
roses but you know what
else this also really really closely
resembles
the false promises made by universities
i have fought
very hard to hold universities to
promises they made particularly in
language education
and in internships and here in canada at
least universities lie
shamelessly as if there's absolutely no
possible negative consequences for them
in promising you things they they can't
deliver they don't even try to deliver
you know when i was studying the cree
language so cree is nicoen it's a
language of
indigenous people in canada so most
people say american indians
we don't use those terms first nations
when i was studying kri
i met up with the two professors who ran
that department
most university departments don't have a
lot more than two professors in charge
of them
i met up with them and i asked simply
look
do you know just one other student who's
studying this language because i can't
do it alone
like i need someone to talk to even if
it's just one other student where i can
repeat the verbs back and forth and
practice the verb endings like
i didn't sign up and pay all this money
for tuition i didn't enroll here
to learn a language in total isolation
with my computer there's got to be at
least
one other student studying the language
and uh
i remember one of the two professors had
a very sorrowful expression on his face
because the answer was no that i was at
that time i was at that time
the only student actually trying to
learn the language cree
i just mentioned i wasn't doing this to
like insult or pwn
the professors i was offering to switch
to other languages so i was saying look
well do you have one student who's doing
den a seriously den is a totally
different language i can switch to den a
do you have one student who's doing soto
soto is a dialectic
ojibwe known as anishinabemuan like i
was offering to work
with the institution here but i was
saying look if i'm literally the
only student isn't it easy to promise
oh sign up for our program you're going
to be surrounded by
wonderful inspiring and inspired young
intellectuals
all kinds of people have so much going
on with you you're going to make uh
business colleagues you're going to make
connections that are going to carry you
through your career for the rest of your
life
you can talk the same way this guy's
talking can you deliver
what happens if you don't deliver
haven't you discredited yourself haven't
you discredited your institution haven't
you created
a kind of disillusionment and real
rancor and hatred
like whether you're selling an mba like
a degree in business
or a language program or an internship
program why don't you really have some
integrity why don't you really have some
earnestness about what these people can
expect
when they're sent out because you know
what i spent a lot of time
on the campus of cambridge university
england
oxford university england every single
person i met
was an idiot i was here at uh university
of victoria
campus i didn't meet one person
interested in politics
in the department of political science i
didn't meet one person interested in the
history of politics of asia
in the department of asian studies i
could now digress and do a long series
of anecdotes about this
you can sign up you can pay ten thousand
dollars in tuition
you can pay fifty thousand dollars in
tuition and supposedly elite
institutions can
utterly fail to deliver on this so you
really wanna promise someone you really
want to promise
someone where all of their friends
currently
are connected to playing these video
games their whole friend group maybe
people they talk to
while they're playing cs go or whatever
right you know
via discord by this maybe their whole
social circle
is connected news you want to promise
them that they're going to have
more and better friends and meaningful
friendships
if they quit video games and lose all
those connections
that's what you want to promise them if
so you're making a promise
that cambridge university england oxford
university of every university i've ever
known or anything to do with
cannot deliver on so i think you've
really got to check yourself and you've
really got to wonder
what is it you're delivering and what
will be the real outcomes
when those promises prove to be
fraudulent
misleading and false no matter how well
intentioned
from your perspective they may be
you can't manipulate somebody into doing
the right
thing for the wrong reasons the core
of everything we're doing here is
instead
to get people to do the right thing
because it really is
the right thing to do now if you make
the decision to start a new life that
involves
one of your interests that we talked
about earlier
then you were gaining experience and
believe it or not
any experiences that you have had
leading up to this new experience
actually helps you to build your new
skill in a manner that is unique to you
when you shift your focus from your
digital distractions to your future
you have an opportunity to choose how
you move forward
and regardless of what kind of life that
you see everyone around you as living
you don't have to model anything that
you see these people doing
in fact no matter what stage in life you
are starting from
you have an opportunity right now to jot
down five ideas that you have always
wanted to learn more about
these can be things like working with
animals at a zoo or a marina for example
and it can be something more adventurous
like being a tour guide in a foreign
city that you've always
wanted to live in if there is something
that you have
always wanted to do then this is your
chance to begin this new adventure
i've had quite a few conflicts with diet
gurus
here on the internet here on youtube and
one of many things i've said to them
when i'm trying to get them to
sympathize with my reason for
criticizing their recklessly encouraging
and from my perspective misleading and
dishonest approach
to diet advice is this you know i notice
that you sit here on youtube
you broadcast your message on the
internet then people send you emails
saying that your method worked and you
select those emails they may send you
videos or photographs themselves
and then you put those up on youtube to
prove that the advice you're giving
is effective do you know what experience
you're not having
you're not having the experience of
actually getting to know someone
face to face and holding their hand as
they struggle to lose this weight
you don't have the experience that many
physical therapists have for example
of meeting someone at the hospital who
is 350 pounds and can barely walk
and then working with them as they
struggle to learn to walk working with
them as they try to lose weight
hearing from them what they're doing
what's working and what's not
why they're losing weight or why they're
failing to lose weight or for a while
they lose weight and they gain it back
you don't actually have that experience
of sympathizing with people
as they try and as they fail and if you
did
even if you had some success stories
even if some of the people you gave this
advice to
and miraculously it worked for them
you'd see it in this context
right the the truth is there are some
people who find it very easy to lose
weight
get in shape and maintain an athletic
body on a meat-based diet and those same
people
they're going to have good results on a
vegan diet but the reality is if you
have this kind of experience
it's just not the case that there's some
one simple turnkey
secret there's there's just this one
weird trick to help you transform your
life that's going to work out every time
or even any significant number of times
and just that experience of knowing
people
face to face and trying to give them
this advice and holding their hand and
seeing them fail
understanding what works and what
doesn't for them and what they're
capable of and what they find they're
incapable of
it's a totally different thing isn't it
so
this guy uh dave dao
i i challenge you dave the the
encouraging things
you've just said now about about having
a career
have you have you sat down with with a
man
i'm not even gonna say a young man have
you ever sit down with a middle-aged man
and looked at his resume looked at his
cv
and then figuratively held his hand as
he went through the process of trying to
transition to a new career
i'm a middle-aged man i have the
experience again
and again and again of showing my cv to
people showing my resume to people
and they say wow this is such an
interesting such an inspirational resume
you've lived such an interesting life
and then the question is okay what what
kind of job can i get next
what kind of career can i have whether
that's moving directly to apply for a
job or
through the universities getting for
okay so what do you think i do
and they sit there and realize they
don't have a goddamn positive thing to
say
right that can be very sad for the
person giving the advice and very sad
for me also okay what you're doing here
it's it's really a kind of reckless hype
telling people in the audience that they
can have a wonderful new career as a
zookeeper they only got like two
specific he's i know
i know an ex zookeeper personally okay
we've made youtube videos together he
talked to me in detail
about what it's really like being a
zookeeper
right think about how different his
advice would be if someone were talking
to him
about starting a career as a zookeeper
in every way not just about
how little money you earn but about what
it's like
to clean up poo every day
and it's not just poo there's blood
every day like it's a really nasty job
okay and you're not just dealing with
wild animals
you're dealing with a very strange mix
of the for-profit sector and the charity
sector
that's trying to make money out of
exploiting those animals
in captivity now dave you just talked oh
you could be a zookeeper
not everyone can be a zookeeper and
again
if you just had the experience of
working with someone face to face
what if you knew someone who came to you
and showed you their resume
and then you held their hand through the
process as they tried
again and again they applied for a
hundred different jobs as a zookeeper
and never got anyone do you think
you'd see this advice you're giving now
differently
in that context the reality is
most people can never have a job
that they find inspirational or even
adequate and it's even more tragic to
recognize that people who do
manage to live their dream just like
this zookeeper i know
former zookeeper at some point they
realize
that what they thought was a dream
really
now has become their nightmare you can
discover new passions
when you begin doing something that you
are getting better at
you begin to develop a passion for it
when this happens
money stops becoming the primary factor
for you wanting to get better at
something and instead
what you do becomes more meaningful to
you when you become passionate with your
work
you get excited to go to bed and you
become excited to wake up every morning
as well because
you're looking forward to starting a new
day
when you're passionate about what you do
you're more likely to work
longer hours which may mean more money
you begin to enjoy
solving problems and nothing will deter
you from wanting to achieve success
and hey you're living a happier life i
have an amazing free
mini guide that will teach you what you
need to know to help you transition
from your digital addictions to creating
the life that you were designed to live
it's called five simple tips to create
an amazing life and
you can get your free copy in the
description below and number one
you can change the world when you find
your
passions and begin to develop skills in
your chosen career
people begin to take notice of you and
will begin to pay attention to your
opinions
on matters in which you show proficiency
and expertise in
it's very peculiar to me that he
presents this argument
with absolutely no personal anecdotes
from his own life
or talking about other people he's known
he doesn't put any kind of a human
face on it i have known
so many people with phds who lived their
whole lives
in bitter mournful isolation because
nobody recognizes their proficiency
nobody recognizes their expertise
and these were people who had a piece of
paper from cambridge or oxford or
harvard some other high power
university that certifies that they're
an expert that says they're an important
person
whose opinion should matter on x y or
zed okay
and then i've known all kinds of people
who don't have that piece of paper but
they really are experts they really do
know
more than anyone in the government
united states about for example
cambodia but nobody's going to ask them
their opinion about the politics of
cambodia or what the united states
policy should be in cambodia or what
have you and to be honest these are
quite simple examples
when you get into all the professions
and areas of research and expertise that
people really
sink their lives into many of them
humble many of them much less glamorous
than studying poverty in cambodia in its
way you know charity work
has its own mystique um this promise he
makes
that developing expertise developing
specialization
uh will lead you to this more rewarding
social and political life to some extent
don't don't we all know
that that must inevitably be a lie that
it must inevitably discredit the person
given the advice and lead to
disillusionment now
um people advised me
my whole life to stop studying
small obscure languages like laotian
like cree like ojibwe that i should stop
doing that
and i should instead study chinese for
these reasons he's talking about
right exactly these reasons like oh make
a difference in the world make the world
a better place
have more colleagues make more of an
impact have more opportunities and
academia by switching from an obscure
language
to a mainstream language a language with
more than a billion speakers
like chinese i will regret that i made
that decision
for the rest of my life okay you can be
an expert
in chinese history chinese politics or
the chinese language
and be totally utterly alone
and i'm not just talking about my own
experience i'm talking about a lot of
people with phds i know
talking about a lot of professors i know
who are very much embittered and live
their lives that way
now whether or not it's any better or in
what particular ways it's better
to study an obscure language like lotion
and so on is another story
but all my life i've known people in
this sense develop expertise whether it
was in
sanskrit pali burmese cambodian all
right
the idea that developing
expertise of this kind leads to respect
renown the opportunity to make the world
a better place
friends colleagues admiration
it's very fundamentally false
and maybe we wish it were true
but we all know what the issues are
that will actually bring you the
admiration and attention
of the masses right we all know exactly
what it is
that you could devote your time and
energy to if you're doing these things
in order to have the approval attention
and adulation
of other people you see that every day
on instagram
and you see it in hollywood movies and
you see it with politicians in the
republican party and the democrat party
pandering to the lowest common
denominator
if you're doing things for the attention
and adoration of the masses then you're
not doing them
just because it is the right
thing to do i didn't study cambodian
to get famous i didn't go to laos and
study lotion and their politics and
history and volunteer to do humanitarian
work to help the poor
in order to get famous or to have 10 000
followers on instagram or to have even
one
friend or one girlfriend or meet the
love of my life no
not at all i did it because it was the
right thing to do
and the reward was that i got to grow up
to be
to become the man that i am now
no more and no less i mean
really people like to disrespect my crew
but the fact is that you know my name
and i don't know you